

# Introduction 


A whole new generation of scholars has recently been entering the world of digital stylistics, appreciating the availability of digital resources in the form of data, tools, and infrastructure. The recent proliferation is visible for example in monographs (e.g., ), easy-to-access analysis tools (e.g., ) and guides to text analysis in programming languages such as R and Python ( ), just to name a few. Contributions to the digital analysis of style abound in journals such as DH Quarterly , Digital Scholarship in the Humanities (formerly Literary and Linguistic Computing ), the newly founded Digital Literary Studies and Cultural Analytics , the proceedings of the Workshops on Computational Linguistics for Literature , as well as in Language and Literature and the International Journal of Corpus Linguistics . Last, but not least, the Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO) has formed the new special interested group (SIG) Digital Literary Stylistics ( [SIG-DLS ](http://dls.hypotheses.org/)). This is an exciting time, with a discipline of digital stylistics in Digital Humanities emerging, expanding, and gradually maturing. 

However, despite these recent developments, and despite a substantial tradition of digital analyses of literary style across fields (see ), digital stylistics as a discipline is still in a nascent status. This can be directly linked to its interdisciplinary character, with a kaleidoscope of methods, research paradigms, and world views. This heterogeneity is as much a potential source of confusion as well as a great asset: 

On the one hand, the diversity may pose disadvantages. Those digital stylisticians who are trained in hermeneutics see themselves confronted with handling the requirements of an empirical quantitative research paradigm, with issues such as standardized research designs, procedures of data sampling, and analytical strategies, including statistics. Others, who come from fields based around computing, such as natural language processing (NLP), computational linguistics, and corpus linguistics, may be unsure what to do with the deliberate open-endedness of qualitative, hermeneutic research and the important role ascribed to subjectivity and context (cf. ). Yet others may be very skeptical about the possibility of clearly defined ‘methods’ for digital stylistics in the first place, because of a perceived irreconcilability of numerical and hermeneutic approaches. Overall, a number of reasons accounts for a perceived lack of clear methodological standards, procedures and designs. 

On the other hand, the juxtaposition of hermeneutic and scientific-empirical traditions provides a great potential for literary style research within DH. Qualitative approaches such as literary criticism and stylistics have developed a rich expertise in describing and understanding the aesthetic effects of literary artifacts. Quantitative approaches such as corpus linguistics, quantitative linguistics, computational linguistics, and data science generally, have concentrated on exploring and explaining large-scale and general language models by linguistic features. In digital stylistics, approaching aspects of style from different angles – be these probabilistically obtained feature patterns, predictive and descriptive accounts of quantitative style distributions, or in-depth interpretations of stylistic phenomena in particular textual contexts – opens up a truly multi-methodological research panorama. 

In fact, digital stylistics, with its many branches and predecessors, has seen method-mixing for a long time (see, e.g., ). Yet, we are presently dwelling on a perceived irreconcilability of a form of distant reading on the one hand, and close reading in a more aesthetically oriented variety on the other. Where distant reading applies aggregating measures that are designed to produce quantitative evidence with statistical backup, hermeneutic reading maintains a more qualitative relationship with (whole) texts, explicitly calling for open-ended and subjective dimensions of interpretation. Between these two paradigms , many see close reading as old-fashioned for being anecdotal, overly subjective, or uncontrolled, whereas to others, distant reading appears perilous for being reductionist, deterministic, or neo-/postpositivist. This situation is reminiscent of the paradigm wars in social science, where for years, one could either adhere to a quantitative or a qualitative mindset (cf. ). 

My suggestion for DH is not to fortify an either-or -mindset (possibly mistaking digital stylistics for a distant-reading only paradigm, cf. ), but to work on a principled coalition of the two views, propelled by a simple and pragmatic view of selecting the best fitting method for any given research question (cf. ). In line with the recently emerged mixed-method paradigm of the social sciences, I thus suggest that DH stylistics should move beyond the dichotomies of close vs. distant , qualitative vs. quantitative , explanatory vs. exploratory , inductive vs. deductive , understanding vs. explaining – and, possibly even hermeneutic vs. empirical [^1]. However, moving beyond here cannot possibly mean resorting to an everything-goes approach that defocuses the nitty-gritty details of difference, but an informed perspective that enables scholars to choose particular research designs by their particular objectives. Seen from the perspective of an emerging discipline of digital stylistics, the challenge is now to provide a common framework for the disparate approaches to stylistic inquiry. This includes a transparent and systematic overview of the different approaches and methods actually employed, as well as a sort of inventory for what kind of method is suitable for what kind of research aim. [^2]

That quantitative style metrics may combine with in-depth studies of style patterns of individual texts has already been proposed from within DH and labeled as middle-distance reading ( , for a similar approach, see also ), or scalable reading ( , see , ). These propositions, however, have just begun to receive broader attention. In fact, many may have mistaken them for the examination of mid-sized data sets that are neither big data (for a recent discussion of this term, see ) nor individual texts, but something in between. In my view, this data-size-driven reading of the term is overly simplistic. Rather, the emphasis should lie not so much on the scale in terms of the size of the data volume examined, but on the research process . Scaling here means complementing one methodology with another, compensating for weaknesses of each approach, and building on the combined strengths. Mueller, in an analogy of using Google earth, describes the essence of scalable reading as to "zoom in and out of things and discover that different properties of phenomena are revealed by looking at them from different distances ". For his account of middle-distance reading, Craig suggests comparing "statistical results […] with fresh readings of the texts or parts of them, directed by the patterns that are highlighted by the tests ". Yet another approach is rapid shuttling between quantitatively attained information and hermeneutic close reading (Kirschenbaum 2009), cited in ). Accordingly, Hayles states that the tension "between algorithmic analysis and hermeneutic close reading should not be overstated ", since their relation is often "configured not so much as an opposition but as a synergistic interaction ". 

Ideally, to provide "a better understanding of research problems than either approach alone ", mixed-methods research is a process of combining discrete qualitative and quantitative steps, motivated by some degree of methodological and epistemological awareness. It thus needs to address the role of interpretation [^3]and the degree of open-endedness and subjectivity involved in either form of research – issues that have received some attention also from within DH (e.g., ). Mixed-method research highlights the hermeneutical dimension of quantitative approaches, not least by emphasizing that quantitative researchers are traditionally "in the background, and their own personal biases and interpretations are seldom discussed ". 


## Quantitative , qualitative , and mixed-methods 


The most basic distinction between qualitative and quantitative methods concerns the nature of the data examined, which is normally numerical vs. non-numerical data . For digital stylistics, this may be simplified as ' numbers derived from aggregations of words/texts ' (quantitative) vs. ' (elements of) meaningful textual configurations ' (qualitative). This discrimination relates to the more common distinction between big and small data sets. One of the most fruitful distinctions is that between variable-oriented and case-oriented analysis: variable-oriented analysis (e.g., style variation across author, genre, time in German Modernist literature ) is more often quantitative, and well-suited for finding probabilistic relationships among variables in a large population, whereas case-oriented analysis (e.g., paradoxical style of Franz Kafka’s The Judgment ) is more often qualitative, geared towards finding specific, concrete, historically grounded patterns common to small sets of cases . Variable-approaches have difficulties with the complexities of causal relationships, while findings of case-approaches often remain particularistic, i.e. cannot be easily generalized. 

Quantitative, variable-driven research overall strives for a high degree of control, using standardization and tests of reliability to ensure replicability and generalizability. It takes care that its measures and results are not dependent on a particular researcher ( objectivity ). In combination with representative data sampling, it thus aims at overall descriptions of situations and phenomena in a systematic and comparable way. In its stereotypical form, quantitative research uses close-ended data collection tools to settle the discussion , and to delimit the range of possible interpretation of its results. 

By contrast, qualitative research is more sensitive to context and process, and aims for in-depth and holistic understanding, in order to do justice to the complexity of a given phenomenon. Samples are usually small, and sampling is guided by theoretical rather than probabilistic considerations. Methods are less formalized than those in the quantitative approach, less replicable, and have greater flexibility . In its stereotypical form, qualitative research uses open-ended data collection designed to opening up the discussion , i.e. to generate new hypotheses and theories and widen the range of possible perspectives on a phenomenon. 

This (simplified) distinction between qualitative and quantitative approaches is enlightening when considering the actual practices in digital stylistics. For example, a prominent approach, algorithmic criticism as proposed by Ramsay (2011), distinguishes between scientific approaches and what he calls algorithmic hermeneutics. In Ramsay’s view, the scientific approach is exceedingly closed-ended, aimed at providing "singular answers to the problem under discussion ", framing "the movement from data to interpretation as fraught with peril ". By contrast, an algorithmic criticism approaches a (textual) problem "in order that the matter become richer, deeper, and ever more complicated ". His suggestion is to apply "hermeneutical freedom "to the (post-algorithmic) interpretation of quantitative results – while retaining "the commitment to methodological rigor demanded by its tools ". However, to Ramsay, interpretation is necessarily "an insistently subjective manner of engagement "– he thus appears to deny digital text analysis the epistemological potential that lies in iterative (quantitative) hypothesis-testing. What is more, by putting such a strong emphasis on the role of post-hoc interpretation, he perilously defocuses the implicit assumptions that feed into the algorithmic modeling itself . 

In my view, the scientific and humanistic paradigms as sketched by Ramsay should both contribute to our discipline’s multi-methodological setup, establishing a rich interconnected network of possible research questions and methods for answering them. This, of course, has implications for the "nature of discourse in which text analysis bids participation "– in my view, this discourse should involve deep and open-ended discussions as well as clear-cut conclusions about stylistic facts. Eventually, people engaged in DH stylistics should "generate more concepts, more theoretical constructions ", and be able to "test their points ". 

The interesting point about mixed-method approaches is that they maintain the basic distinction between quantitative and qualitative methods, while simultaneously transcending it. Thus, they firstly acknowledge the two paradigms, noting their strength and weaknesses, and then propose to: "[c]ombine the methods in a way that achieves complementary strengths and non-overlapping weaknesses. "With this general rationale at its core, mixed-methods research has been established as a third empirical paradigm [^4], with its own range of research design types (cf. . 


## Mixed-methods Digital Style Analysis 


The strengths of mixed-methods can be directly applied to digital stylistics: close and distant reading complement each other when adding meaning to numbers, and precision to hermeneutically obtained insight. Also, the generalizability of qualitative findings can be increased, as quantitative findings can be grounded in context-driven analyses. Results from both approaches can be validated through corroboration and convergence. Another great asset of such a coalition of approaches is mutual methods critique , which likely increases the validity of data and results as much as that of methods. And finally, a broader range of research questions can be asked, which leads to a varied and flexible generation of knowledge . 

In digital stylistics, we are confronted with the fact that style is a heterogeneous category – already within literary studies, and ever more so when adopting interdisciplinary and international perspectives (for an overview of distinct philological definitions of style, see ). A definition that allows for a quantitative as well as for a qualitative perspective on style, and mixed approaches, is the following one: "Style is a property of texts constituted by an ensemble of formal features which can be observed quantitatively or qualitatively. "A quantitative, variable-driven approach may be interested in extracting formal features from a large data set devoid of context, for example gauging the similarity of authors by looking at the most frequently used words (the dominant stylometric measure), whereas a case-driven approach may be interested in aspects of the holistic gestalt of single texts, or the function of previously extracted featured within that context. A third kind of approach may use a quantitative measure for exploring possible new variables (and thus, as a quantitative-heuristic approach may not fit the simplified quantitative-qualitative dichotomy). 

The next section starts with a short (and by no means complete) overview of qualitative and quantitative methods relevant for digital stylistics, including a view on their respective strengths and limitations. It is followed by a sketch of my own mixed-method study, which will then be reported in more detail in section (3). Section (4) will subsequently draw conclusions for practices in digital stylistics as an emerging field within DH. 


# The Method of the Art 


In actual stylistic research, the ensemble of formal features is as a rule viewed either from a predominantly quantitative or from a predominantly qualitative angle. With their predominant qualitative perspective, literary criticism, (digital) stylistics, aesthetics, and (digital) narratology have traditionally relied on versions of close reading. This mode of scrutinizing analysis and synthesizing interpretation of literary artifacts exploits the kind of situated and intuitive knowledge that human evolution has produced in concert with scholarly expertise (for a discussion of hermeneutics in DH, see . In stylistics, it has been most typically applied to: (a) explorations of the effect of certain stylistic features in textual interaction, and (b) determining the stylistic character of a piece of art as a coherent unit, including the contributing elements . Goals of close reading are linguistic observation as much as literary insight , in the sense of Spitzer’s hermeneutic circle . 

Applications of close reading to stylistic analysis are documented by a vast literature, with its typical concentration on particular cases (and, alas, sometimes vague generalizations). Variants of close reading, as a form of qualitative research, are applied also in digital text analysis, including computational linguistics/natural language processing (NLP). For example, digital style research employs a range of visualization and manual annotation tools [^5]for close reading, such as KWIC ( Keyword in Context ), which is a method typically applied in corpus stylistics. KWIC displays all instances of a search word vertically, with the words’ direct textual context to both sides (also called concordance ). Running KWIC lists (facilitated by tools such as AntConc and Voyant, as well as particular functions in R and Python) allows the discerning of meaning and possibly the lexico-grammatical function of a particular instance of a lemma in context (for an application in literary criticism, see e.g., ). Annotation , depending on the basic methodological approach, [^6]may also involve some form of close reading. For quantification-oriented annotation paradigms, this holds true especially for the stage in which annotation (or tagging ) schemata are developed, with a typical back- and forth-movement between textual context, frequency operations, and theoretical conceptualization. In much the same way, the stages of close reading , or qualitative analysis are applied in the development of machine learning algorithms and error analysis in computational linguistics . 

In order to ensure some standard of compatibility and transparency also for close reading, stylisticians have established basic criteria for the stylistic method (e.g., ), with rigorous ( "based on an explicit framework of analysis "), retrievable ( "organised through explicit terms and criteria, the meanings of which are agreed upon by other students of stylistics "), and replicable ( "sufficiently transparent as to allow other stylisticians to verify them, either by testing them on the same text or by applying them beyond that text ". Despite its vital role in humanistic inquiry, close reading, as any approach, has its limitations. Mentioned are the limited capacity in terms of data sets and time, the problems with generalization, the prominent role of the scholar’s introspection, and the fact that distinct features and factors are normally intermingled in complex gestalts and thus may be hard to isolate. Such issues may be discussed and compensated for in research that combines qualitative phases with quantitative ones. 

For quantitative analysis, style needs to be formalized and reduced to one or few distinctive and machine-readable features (for a stylistic perspective on style markers, see ; for a stylometric one, see ). This applies to a potentially open list of linguistic and literary features (e.g., word frequency, length of words/sentences, vocabulary density, but possibly also more literary features, such as metaphor, or speech and thought representation). Quantitative research applies a range of different methods brought in from the fields of computational linguistics/natural language processing (NLP) and corpus linguistics. Simple counting operations (e.g., word frequencies, type-token-ratios, word and sentence length) are often followed by statistics such as the chi-square test and t-score, with prominent measures being collocation and keyword analysis . Statistically more advanced are multivariate methods that examine several variables at the same time (e.g., loglinear regression mainly used in corpus stylistics, as well as ANOVA, principal component analysis, cluster analysis, discriminant analysis, and factor analysis; (cf. ; see also ). One of the currently most popular techniques of quantitative stylistics is cluster analysis of stylistic similarity (e.g., using Burrows’s Delta; ). This kind of analysis operates on the basis of (standardized) measures of the most common features within and across texts . A typical objective is to quantitatively scrutinize a particular period for its style, disambiguating an author effect from other (hidden) kinds of effects, such as genre , and time. To this aim, a viable way is to pick this style indicator and generalize over large sets of literary data (see ; also ). In stylometry, using supervised machine learning to identify the strength of the stylistic signal currently probably comes closest to the core of the prototypical quantitative paradigm, ruling out confounding factors and establishing clear cause-effect relationships (here, the cause would be one or more of the examined factors author, genre, time; the effect is the stylistic signal observed in most common words). [^7]

However, quantitative methods (such as factor analysis, multi–dimensional scaling, principal component analysis, and so on) are in fact often used in a more open-ended and exploratory way, something traditionally ascribed to qualitative research. Quantitative stylistic exploration may find new features and relations between known factors, for example between canonicity and writing style. For example, Algee-Hewitt et al. compared what they call the archive , that part of ever-published fiction that is now available in digitized form, to canonical sets of novels. Among their findings is that archive texts in comparison with canonical ones are stylistically more similar to a written mode of communication, even in their spoken passages . This finding was not made in answer to a specific hypothesis, but is a valid one. Similarly, the growing number of NLP-adaptations to the literary domain (including neural networks, machine learning, and advanced modes of data mining, cf. ; see also the proceedings of the workshops Computational Linguistics for Literature [^8]) is typically used for exploration – hypothesis testing in the strict sense is (still) less common. NLP methods, as well as those of data science [^9]that crunch big data to aggregated variables (e.g., ), are able to observe new patterns and correlations, allowing for a multitude of possible factors to be examined. 

However, regardless of being used exploratorily or explanatorily, with regard to the questions of literary stylistics, at the present point in time, the quantitative types of analysis often appear superficial. Features are necessarily restricted to those than can be reduced to a machine-readable format and used in automatic analysis. Quantitative stylistics, despite a tendency to adapt more complex models, is as a rule decontextualized, operates at the variable level, and is reduced to observing particular types of features. Under certain conditions, precisely these characteristics may foster progress. However, in order to attain a more complete degree of linguistic and literary insight for style , quantitative examinations need to be complemented by qualitative ones. 

To flesh out these thoughts, in the following I will report on my own mixed-methods study on Franz Kafka’s prose in Newer and Modern German Literature (corpus of about 5.9 million words). 


# Making the test bed 


From the reservoir of digital methods on the qualitative–quantitative scale, I selected three easy-to-access, yet established ones. With style operationalized as an ensemble of formal features (see above), I reconstructed a hypothesis about Kafka’s style from literary studies, which was then examined in a complementary successive analysis: 


- Hypothesis Generation from Literary Criticism. I distilled from literary criticism converging evidence for a relatively broad assumption about Kafka’s style, the solitariness -hypothesis (see below). Finding convincing observations and arguments from the existing literature is thus a necessary step in hypothesis generation. This view has been put forward on the basis of qualitative, hermeneutic interpretations of separate texts (involving the description of linguistic features and literary effects). The kind of evidence given so far offers no firm ground for generalization. 
- Quantitative Hypothesis Testing. My first empirical step was quantitative hypothesis testing. Extending on prior research , I examined the solitariness -hypothesis on a wider data basis (comparing Kafka’s texts to texts by more than 20 other German authors across time). [^10]For the sake of quantitative breadth, I relinquished the rich complexity of case-driven analysis, using as an indicator of style a standardized aggregate measure of most frequent words, Delta (see below) and cluster analysis. A problem with this type of analysis is that it does not provide insights into the particular features that may be responsible for Kafka’s (assumedly) distinctive style. 
- Quantitative Exploration. The second analysis applied another frequency-based measure, keyness , to explore the stylistic patterns possibly underlying the results from the cluster analysis. Keeping the time signal relatively constant, I compared Kafka’s word use to four authors belonging to the same literary epoch, Modernism. Style was here identified as a statistically defined norm (the numerical reference being the same corpus used in the first analysis), treating word forms that are significantly more frequent than that norm as stylistically marked . Building on prior research , I manually grouped the top 100 overrepresented word forms into (potential) word classes. A category of word forms emerged as particular to the Kafka sample that may be used for subtly managing modality. However, even though this analysis tackles style at the feature level, it is still strongly decontextualized. More context was needed to add value and insight to my observations. 
- Qualitative Text Analysis. In a qualitative close reading of one of Kafka’s stories ( The Judgment) taken from the same corpus as before, I focused on just two potential modal particles derived from the previous step. Using KWIC ( Key Word in Context ) to systematically analyze their local usage, taking into account the context of Kafka’s story (including the plot), I examined their use and potential functions throughout the unfolding story . From here, further analysis may take up several possible leads given by the results. These may involve a larger data set and increased statistical rigor – as well as the qualitative detail of other texts and features (modal particles, negations, and adverbs). 



# Mixed-Methods Style Analysis of Kafka 



# Applying Mixed-Methods to Kafka 


As described above, a series of interlaced stylistic studies was conducted, applying different methods tailored to distinct questions on aspects of Franz Kafka’s writing style. 


## Hypothesis Generation from Literary Criticism 


In Kafka studies, the most basic tenet on Kafka’s style is that it is not only unique, but even solitary : Scholars converge in finding that among his generation, nobody else writes like him (cf. e.g., ). The proposed solitariness has been related to a special lexical precision and scantiness , features of elevated everyday language and technical language, together with an accumulation of modal adverbs, a hypotactic sentence structure, and a frequent use of inner monologue and especially free indirect discourse. The narrative effect of his language use has been stated as the objective registration of external events, accompanied by a simultaneous limited internal perspective of literary characters (e.g., ). The adjective kafkaesque generally means "complicated, confusing, and threatening ", and this label corresponds with a consensus on the irritation that Kafka’s prose instills in readers, be they naïve or professional: "Each sentence says 'interpret me', and none will permit it ". [^11]


## Study 1: Quantitative Hypothesis Testing 


For my first study, I selected an indicator of style that is firmly established within stylometry: the most frequent words (mfw) of a text and text set. The (relative) frequencies of the most common words per text in a given text set are used to compute a distance measure, which determines the stylistic similarity/dissimilarity of each text from each other text. I used a version of Burrows’s Delta ( ), which standardizes the mean word frequency (by calculating the z -score) for each text and then computes the "mean of the absolute differences between the z -scores for a set of word-variables in a given text-group and the z -scores for the same set of word-variables in a target text ". [^12]In a subsequent cluster-analysis, which employed the ward-linkage algorithm , the large matrix of distances scores between individual texts was reduced to hierarchically aligned groupings of texts that are visualized, the so-called clusters. I chose a distance measure with cluster analysis because it is a robust measure of text similarity and has been shown to reliably identify signals of author, genre, and time , also in German literary texts . [^13]

My hypotheses were as follows: 


- H1: Kafka’s texts are more similar to each other than they are to other texts, and, as a group, are by comparison more dissimilar from other (groups of) texts . For the cluster analysis, this means two things: (a) a similarity-cluster can be observed for Kafka’s texts; (b) the observed Kafka-cluster shows distances from other (potential) clusters that are greater than any other distances observed. 
- H0: Kafka’s texts do not show a greater similarity to each other than to any other text. In the cluster analysis, Kafka’s texts do not cluster with each other. However, as authorship is a strong predictor of style, clustering by author is generally expected. [^14]Therefore, H0 may be reformulated: Kafka’s texts as a potential group of texts related by similarity do not show greater dissimilarity to other groups of texts by comparison. In the cluster analysis, any Kafka-cluster of texts thus has a similar distance to other potentially observed author-clusters as these have from each other. 


When considering these hypotheses before the background of the chosen method, a caveat is due: in this application, cluster analysis does not allow statistical hypothesis testing in a strict sense. In other words, there is no way of determining the probability of falsely rejecting the H0 (type I error, p -value) or the probability of rejecting a true hypothesis as incorrect (type II error, the failure to reject a false null hypothesis, a false negative , i.e., failing to detect an effect that is present). This means I cannot determine causal or even correlational relations between variables (authorship as influencing style as measured by mfw). 

I used cluster analysis and its iterative version, bootstrap consensus trees , applying Eder’s Delta as facilitated by the stylo package for R . My corpus consisted of 64 German prose texts available for the stylo suite of tools [^15], three texts by Robert Walser (to whom Kafka has been traditionally compared), and 27 texts of different length written by Kafka [^16]compiled to seven distinct text samples. The final corpus amounts to altogether 74 text samples (about 5.9 million words). In the analysis, pronouns were deleted to avoid bias for narrative perspective. 


## Cluster Analysis using Eder’s Delta. Bootstrap Consensus Tree 


Figure 2 shows a bootstrap consensus tree. It is the result of an iterative cluster analysis, keeping constant all parameter settings but the number of features . Here the selected feature is mfw, the most frequent words shared by the included texts. For the consensus tree, the upper limit of the feature vector was set to 1,500 mfw, the lower one to 800 mfw. [^17]Figure 2 shows that Kafka’s texts indeed form a cluster (the light green cluster to the upper right). It also depicts a number of branches that join texts by distinct authors (thereby demonstrating style similarity), most pronouncedly the two main branches in the lower half (both with subbranches of more than seven authors), as well as two smaller branches each joining two authors (Keller/Goethe and May/Achleitner). Most of Kafka’s direct contemporaries are thus joined by the big branch at the lower left (Bonsels, Wassermann, Falke, Hesse, Mann, Schnitzler), while the branch at the lower right suggest similarities between older texts (Goethe, Brentano, Arnim, Hoffmann) and the Swiss (historical) realist Meyer. 

In opposition to authors in both these groups, Kafka’s cluster starts directly from the center, which means that Kafka’s texts are more similar to each other than to other authors’ texts. However, the same is true for Gerstäcker, Heiberg, Sapper, Fontane, and Spyri. Note that the consensus tree is not informative about the distance of any two branches starting from the root. Hence, the first cluster analysis does not falsify the assumption that Kafka writes in a solitary way. However, despite being a relatively robust measure of stylistic similarity (incorporating repeated runs), the consensus tree provides rather limited information. 


## Cluster Analysis using Eder's Delta. Dendrograms (1100 MFW) 



## Cluster Analysis using Eder's Delta. Dendrograms (1300 MFW) 


Figures 3 and 4 are more informative with regard to the actual similarities between texts than Figure 2. These dendrograms (two of the eight separate dendrograms underlying the consensus tree of Fig. 2) are snapshots that reflect the particular clustering of texts with feature-parameter set uniquely to 1,100 mfw and to 1,300 mfw, respectively. Both depict a situation in which Kafka’s texts indeed form a cluster, which means that they are more similar to each other than to any other text in the study. Also, Kafka’s texts (as a group) are at a relatively long distance from the nearest neighbors, Spyri, Fontane, Sapper, and Gerstäcker (Fig. 3), and Spyri, Fontane, and Sapper (Fig. 4). Additionally, forming a group with the four/three nearest neighbors, Kafka is removed from the rest of the corpus. 

Like Fig. 2, despite slight differences, Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 do not falsify the assumption that Kafka writes in a solitary manner. However, we need to take into account the company in this outlier group , two children’s books authors (Johanna Spyri, author of Heidi , and Agnes Sapper) as well as Germany’s chief proponent of poetic realism (Theodor Fontane), and an author of popular adventure and travel prose (Friedrich Gerstäcker). In opposition to Kafka, the other four were immensely popular during their own and Kafka’s lifetime. Without making too strong assumptions on the basis of the two particular dendrograms [^18], these results may be used as a heuristic for furthering the stylistic research into Kafka’s prose: It is common ground in literary studies that Kafka achieved the commonly attested refusal of making sense ( "Sinnverweigerung "), with the techniques of the European tradition of narration ( "mit den Mitteln der europäischen Erzähltradition "). In Fig. 3 and 4 this tradition appears to show itself in the form of the nearest neighbors, all of which allegedly use a realistic writing style (with a great amount of concrete detail and vividly rendered descriptions, as well as dialogue). Further study needs to establish whether there really is a stylistic similarity with these authors (and among them), and, if so, what features contribute. What is more, Kafka research has shown that he liked reading books for younger readers, as well as (popular) adventure literature and journey descriptions in general (e.g., ). There is hence some reason to assume that the nearest neighbors may reflect some of Kafka’s own reading habits . This kind of speculation merits further pursuing. 

This is where the analysis of this particular quantitative measure stops, letting the aggregated data speak for itself. However, in the present context, it is not really much it can say, despite a relatively weak corroboration of the reported hypothesis, which originates from rich hermeneutic observations. One problem with the measure is here that we do not know which particular textual features are responsible for the dissimilarity (or similarity) of styles: it computes the relative stylistic differences between a whole range of texts, based on a ‘bag-of-words’ approach that has to take a priori decisions about the number of mfw, the linkage algorithms, and other parameters. This combination of black box and cherry picking problems (for a critical overview, see ) is rather frustrating, especially to the philologist, who would like to pin down the specific textual features that make Kafka unique (for quantitative approaches to features, see for example ). The next step is applying a so-called keyness analysis, which allows for an exploration of the features responsible for stylistic differences between distinct texts and text collections. 


## Study 2: Quantitative Exploration 


To pry open the black box of the Delta measure to examine the features that actually make a difference in an author’s style, I selected keyness analysis . This established measure of corpus stylistics compares the frequencies of single words (or part-of-speech tags, or semantic tags) included in some text (collection) with those obtained in a (normally larger) reference corpus. It outputs a long list of words that deviate statistically from that reference corpus . Here, the reference corpus acts as a statistical norm against which the word use in the text(s) under scrutiny may be compared. The examined words, depending on whether they deviate positively or negatively, are thus over- or under-represented with regard to that norm. Keyness analysis traditionally applies a Log-likelihood (LL) measure of difference in word usage (which is here more reliable than chi-squared analysis, cf. ). 

In order to ensure internal validity across sub-studies, I used the same corpus as in the cluster analysis. The same Kafka samples included in the first study thus formed a Kafka corpus , and the remaining 67 texts samples now worked as a reference corpus. In addition to the Kafka corpus, I compiled four new author corpora, extracted from TextGrid: Peter Altenberg, Gustav Meyrink, Arthur Schnitzler, and Georg Trakl (see Table 1 for a summary of the author and reference corpora). In order to control as many factors as possible, the time signal was kept relatively constant: authors were selected from the literary epoch Modernism (roughly 1880-1930). Also, all authors are male, and ideolect was controlled: the four authors share with Kafka a place at a southern German language continuum . However, given the particularities of Kafka’s (many very short texts and his particular technique of rendering narrative perspective), I deliberately did not control genre, and included drama (Schnitzler’s dramatic work, with its high proportion of fictional dialogue), poetry (Trakl’s poems with their highly subjective and sensual perspective), and (short) experimental prose (Altenberg’s narrative poems with a disengaged perspective, impressionistic description of sensual perception, and usage of colloquialisms). Through this, I hoped to allow for emerging stylistic patterns particular to Kafka. 


| Epoch  || Author  || No. of words  |
|-||-||-|| Modernism  || Kafka  || ~308,400  ||  || Altenberg  || ~245,200  ||  || Trakl  || ~21,300  ||  || Meyrink  || ~156,500  ||  || Schnitzler  || ~1,037,000  || Newer German Literature  || 22 authors  || ~5,873,100  |


Using the software tool AntConc the analysis rendered word lists that are significantly more common in each of the respective target corpora than in the reference corpus Newer German Literature (about 5.9 million words). [^19]I decided to examine these lists for word classes (part-of-speech, POS) in order to observe not content (as a tendency indicated by proper names and common nouns), but rather stylistic patterns. According to authorship attribution studies, the latter may be observed especially among functional word classes. My research questions were: 


- What differences between the five authors are striking among the top 100 keywords? 
- Which word classes are particularly common in Kafka when compared to the other authors? 


The distribution of word classes among the top 100 keywords in each author-corpus rendered a number of interesting findings (see also ). For the current purpose, however, the most interesting one is this: Among the words most strongly overrepresented in Kafka’s prose, a variety falls into a category of potential modal words , which I operationally defined as word forms that (a) possess few semantic features when decontextualized; and (b) are typically used as adverbs, negations, and modal particles (but may have functions as conjunctions or other types of particles). For reasons of focus, I excluded (modal) verbs from the analysis. The observed types (e.g., aber, nicht, allerdings, vielleicht, schon, ja, auch ) are semantically very flexible, potentially exerting distinct functions across different co(n)texts, e.g., to manage doubt/certainty, limit/broaden scope of assertions, and for negative/positive evaluation. 


## Number of modal words identified in the keyness analysis (Kafka, Altenberg, Trakl, Schnitzler, Meyrink) 


Figure 5 shows the number of modal words identified in the keyness analysis for each of the five authors: The distinct types show up among the 100 statistically overrepresented word-forms (e.g., the types ja, doch, schon amounting to three counts). Fig. 5 reports that Kafka’s usage of this category is more substantial (N=27) than Altenberg’s (N=13) [^20], Schnitzler’s (N=12), Meyrink’s (N=7), and Trakl’s (N=1). Given the reference corpus, Kafka’s prose is hence marked by a more varied use of modal words . [^21]Specifically in their use as modal particles, words like ja, schon, doch, and nur may exert very subtle, but important, pragmatic functions of negotiating shared knowledge and beliefs. Note that they belong among the most frequent words of the German language generally, but are still overrepresented in Kafka’s prose – at least when compared with our reference corpus of literary texts. They may thus be a key to explaining (aspects of) Kafka’s subtly disconcerting style. However, more analysis is needed to further test this assumption. 

To sum up, the application of keyness analysis to Kafka and other Modernist authors has pointed to a quantitative style pattern in Kafka’s prose, a high frequency of lemmas that may perform modal functions in the discourse. While it is clear that more research is required – for example varying reference corpora with principled attention to the variable genre (the used corpora contain narrative texts as well as poems and dramatic texts), and using more author-corpora – the analysis has shown that an exploration of quantitative patterns in terms of single words is quite useful. Indeed, it provides a first take at answering the question of what underlies the clustering observed in the Quantitative Hypothesis Testing . It could not falsify the philological finding that Kafka’s style is defined by a particular use of modal adverbs (e.g., ). However, the identified category of lemmas needs disambiguation as to their grammatical categories and local functions in textual passages. We thus need more context. 


## Study 3: Qualitative Text Analysis 


The third step of my project breaks down the complexity of the broad list of modal -type words run up by the keyword list, by zooming in on just two lemmas, namely, ja and doch . As modal particles, both have been well described in the linguistic literature and belong to the most frequent German modal particles . Generally, modal particles cater to intentionally attaching an utterance to the conversational frame, structure the common knowledge base of the interlocutors by indicating common ground, give prompts as to the felicitous interpretation of utterances in the given context, indicate subjective stance of speakers, and establish anaphoric reference with prior discourse. 


## KWIC list of all instances of ja in Kafka’s Das Urteil ( The Judgment ) 


In answer to the research question "What functions do the modal particles ja and doch exert in Kafka’s short narration The Judgment (1912)? ", the method of choice was a digital type of close reading of the text. – I used a digital KWIC ( Keyword in Context) tool for a starting point. [^22]Figure 6 shows that of the N=18 instances of ja , n=12 may be identified as modal particles; and a similar picture can be observed for doch , where of N=19 retrieved instances, n=9 are clear modal particles. This frequency roughly equals the proportion of each word found in natural spoken discourse in German . 

The combined linguistic/narratological examination of the usage of ja and doch throughout the story revealed that the two lemmas mostly do not accord with the causality structure of the narrated world (for details, see : The two characters, a father and his son, do not communicate on the basis of a reliable common ground. Instead, there are constant shifts in basic beliefs, and thus, in part due to the use of modal particles (or accompanied by them as symptoms of underlying communicative shortcomings) the management of information fails epically, resulting in the death of the son. In particular, ja is normally used to signal that interlocutor A assumes that interlocutor B maintains a shared knowledge/belief at the present point in time; doch is normally used to signal that interlocutor A assumes that interlocutor B is presently not aware of an allegedly shared knowledge/belief. However, in The Judgment , the characters often use them in an infelicitous way, not respecting conventional pragmatic principles. The fact that in terms of frequency, the modal particles in Kafka’s fictional narrative roughly equal the natural distribution in spoken language may explain the overuse identified in the keyness analysis, especially when assuming that modal particles are overall not as frequent in fictional writing. Speculatively, one may adopt the idea that the use of ja and doch in The Judgment is typical for Kafka’s use of modal particles in general, especially taking into account that modal particles are indicators of free indirect discourse, which is one of the properties frequently assigned to Kafka’s prose. 

Yet, more (quantitative and qualitative) analysis is needed to further flesh out and test these hypotheses. For now, it may be stated that the use of two specific modal particles indeed seems to contribute to the "elevated everyday language "described as typical of Kafka’s style (in Metamorphosis , cf. ). The examination of two modal particles in one particular text used the local lexical/syntactical context as well as that of the story world with its complex social-communicative relations. Since modal particles are heavily dependent on contextual analysis, both levels are essential when striving to make well-informed statements about their function in Kafka’s style. 

To sum up, this article has presented new findings on Kafka’s prose (compared to other authors writing in German) gathered in complementary successive analysis. It tested philological findings by means of a method of data aggregation operating on a comparably large data set, explored author’s style by looking at the probabilities of word frequencies, and eventually zoomed into the possible functions of two modal particles within the text world of one story. To ensure compatibility, my study kept the reference corpus constant, and varied the style measure only subtly (both quantitative analyses work with raw quantities of inflected word forms, and two of these word forms were queried through KWIC in the particular story The Judgment ). 

Yet, my main objective was to raise awareness of the methodological issues of doing digital stylistics. The different steps varied in the way in which they approached Kafka’s style – quantitatively and qualitatively, explanatory and exploratory, deductively and inductively, and also in the degree of speculation and interpretative freedom licensed. With regard to quantitative analysis, I have highlighted that hypothesis testing in the strict sense of the term is still a desideratum in my work. The same holds for analysis of statistical correlations and interactions on a broader data basis. My future research will take care of this: We are currently building a Corpus of Literary Modernism (KOLIMO, see footnote above) for examining the possible relations between factors such as author, genre, time of publication etc. and style variables such as part of speech, lexical density, and readability, but also more traditionally literary features such as metaphor . 


# Conclusions 


Above, I first proposed that the interdisciplinary setup of DH stylistics has advantages and disadvantages, depending on how we handle the issue, and that in fact, DH style studies may be a natural environment for the mixed-methods paradigm. To contextualize this, I have reported on my own research, assuming that in terms of its general character, it may be quite representative of digital text analysis, even though the range of methods and questions found in DH stylistics is naturally much wider. For reasons of focus, further crucial dimensions of doing DH stylistics that relate to research design have not been mentioned, such as programming, sample selection, edition and publication. 

I pointed out that in some moments, in line with a ‘quantitative paradigm’, we may strive for open questions to be settled, and possibilities for interpretation of results to be delimited in order to achieve significant and replicable results. At other points of the research process, we may tap into the qualitative paradigm , in line with our hermeneutic tradition, allowing higher degrees of (aesthetic) subjectivity, generating ideas, and opening discussion of alleged securities. Pointing towards a mixed-methods paradigm , I would now like to conclude by considering Moretti’s take on distant reading: "If we want to understand the system in its entirety, we must accept losing something. We always pay a price for theoretical knowledge: reality is infinitely rich; concepts are abstract, are poor. But it’s precisely this ‘poverty’ that makes it possible to handle them, and therefore to know. This is why less is actually more. "My point in this paper has been to embrace distant reading's variable-driven principle, but to complement it by a paradigm that is case-driven, looks at smaller samples, and may indulge in open-ended interpretation about connections between different variables. Both general approaches have their merit, and tapping into the methodological flexibility offered by a mixed-methods paradigm will allow for the interaction of different mindsets in a structured way. 

By mutual methods critique, we may more vigorously utilize the meaning potential of crunched numbers, as well as sharpen hermeneutically obtained insight to a new degree of precision. Here, the digital turn is possibly what really accelerates the growth of a third culture in the sense of Snow – one that has explanatory as well as exploratory moments, with thick ’ understanding as well as the poverty of aggregation mentioned by Moretti. A mixed-method paradigm includes approaches for ‘opening up the discussion’ as much as those that ‘settle it’. 


# Author’s Note 


Many thanks to the editorial team, led by Joris van Zundert, for invoking and guiding the volume, as well as for their feedback at multiple stages of the publication process. Thanks also to the three anonymous reviewers who provided me not only with detailed and constructive feedback, but who also were generous in pointing out the things they valued. A big thank you to Andrea Hense, an ally from the Sociological Research Institute Göttingen (SOFI) and to Steffen Kühnel of the Center of Methods in Social Sciences at Göttingen University, both of whom made time for discussing my research. And finally, many thanks to Camilla di Biase-Dyson, who proof-read an earlier version of the paper, and to Zsófia Demjen, for proof-reading the final version. Any remaining errors are my own. 


# notes

[^1]:  One should note that
                        mixed-methods is essentially an empirical research paradigm. This is
                        compatible with a digital stylistics that understands
                            empirical in the wide sense – as the
                            acquisition of knowledge through observation
                        (“Wissensgewinn durch Beobachtung”) .
[^2]:  This may possibly even entail striving for some unifying
                        epistemological perspective. Some mixed-methods scholars advocate
                        pragmatism, such as Creswell who assumes a strong link between
                            worldviews (e.g., postpositivist, social
                        constructivist, participatory, pragmatic) and research methods . Others, such as Kelle describe weaker links
                        between particular world views and methods .
[^3]:  Within mixed-method approaches, interpretation is being
                        recognized as a vital operation, linked to the tradition of hermeneutic
                        inquiry: data analysis, including quantitative data
                                analysis, is a process of interpretation involving basic hermeneutic
                                principles. Good mixed-methods research in DH stylistics should fulfill criteria
                        that allow for complementariness (cf. ) – and methodological awareness. If such criteria are met, subjectivity
                        and phases of open-ended interpretation are highly justified. These become
                        problematic only where introspection and impressionistic observations are
                        used in an opaque way, which however is true for any quantitative-scientific
                        study as well . Problematic is also a dogmatic
                        rejection of (aggregated) data. Indispensable practical
                        factors of sound mixed-method research are clear language use and the
                        definition of concepts and terms.
[^4]:  Recently, scholars like
                            Symonds & Gorard have emphasized that a distinction between
                                quantitative and
                                qualitative research is a stereotypical
                            idealization . As such, it indeed helps
                            structuring our understanding of practices. However, it may be
                            misleading to use a dichotomy as a basis for invoking a mixed-methods
                            paradigm, since research processes ‘in the wild’ are not necessarily
                            paradigmatic. Rather, they lie on a continuum between
                                    open-endedness vs.
                                    closed-endedness (data collection
                            tools), non-numerical vs.
                                    numerical (data types), and
                                    interpretation of natural occurring
                                    data vs.
                                    counting/aggregation/statistics
                            (analytical techniques). A gradual character of
                            quantification/qualification is actually evident in digital stylistics:
                            there are many quantitative studies that aim at exploration, rather than
                            at explanation through hypothesis testing (e.g., data science in the
                            sense of ). At the same time, close reading
                            can be used to test hypotheses derived from statistical quantitative
                            analyses (e.g., revealing what mode of thought representation is
                            actually invoked by a certain verb type that contributes significantly
                            to a factor analysis of genre style). However, I believe that working
                            with research paradigms has a useful structuring function and therefore
                            shall be maintained for the time being.
[^5]:  For a number of easily accessible text analysis visualization
                        tools, see the web-based tool Voyant .
[^6]:  CATMA is a tool for manual
                        hermeneutic digital text annotation that features a comprehensive
                        narratological tag set .
[^7]: See , whose article on the
                        genealogy of distant reading was not yet available at the time of writing
                        and will thus not be discussed in depth. His key argument is that the basic
                        distinction of what he calls distant reading from other
                        forms of literary criticism is the practice of framing historical inquiry
                            as an experiment, using hypotheses and samples (of texts or other social
                            evidence) that are defined before the writer settles on a
                            conclusion. (5). He thus draws a basic distinction between
                        exploratory (other forms of literary criticism) and
                        explanatory (distant reading) inquiry. Although, as
                        explained above, I see a great value in mapping the distinction of
                            distant vs. other forms of reading onto the basic
                            quantitative vs. qualitative paradigms, I do not
                        fully agree with Underwood’s general characterization of “distant reading”
                        as an experimental hypothesis-testing endeavor. There
                        is, after all, a great number of distant
                        reading-studies that uses data aggregation methods and big data
                        sets to explore (emerging) patterns. Such studies, which are fully valid, as
                        I will show below, do not apply hypothesis-testing in the strict
                        sense.
[^8]:  Retrievable under http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W/W15/#0700
[^9]:  Scholars like
                        Manovich (2015) and Anderson (2008) take a relatively extreme stance,
                        proclaiming that with the large available repositories of data, the nature
                        of numerically transformable data is fundamentally changing: instead of
                            long data, which is (traditionally) organized in
                        few variables with many pertaining cases, the new type is wide
                            data, clustered in many variables with a huge amount of
                        individual cases . In data
                            mining, data exploration techniques incl. dimension reduction
                        are most important for predictive analysis and machine learning based on
                        probabilities of correlations. While correlative/association analyses have
                        long been established in computational and corpus linguistics (as in social
                        sciences), big data science appears in a new quality.
                        In its most prominent formulation it forsakes the quest for causality (and
                            theory) altogether .
                        Seen from the perspective of mixed-methods, however, there is no reason for
                        why one should not include stages of zooming in on causal
                        relationships.
[^10]:  As will be seen below, this is a somewhat loose
                            understanding of hypothesis testing. Explanatory hypothesis testing in
                            the strict quantitative sense would have selected a combination of
                            hypothesis and method that leaves much less room for confounding
                            variables. The particular analysis is thus a typical example for the
                            current state of the field, pending more rigorous and wide-spread
                            applications of hypothesis testing.
[^11]:  It is an open (empirical) question how much of this effect of
                            Kafka’s prose may in fact be attributed to his ‘style’, and in how much
                            it is a matter of plot. Since both dimensions tend
                            to feed into each other, further research is needed to creatively
                            establish ways of description and measurement.
[^12]: Z-scores represent the distance between the individual raw
                            frequencies and an observed group mean, in units of the standard
                            deviation. 
[^13]:  Stylometric measures, first developed
                            for authorship attribution, and lately adopted by DH for mostly literary
                            history studies, have in fact been used widely for exploratory purposes
                                . This shows that a
                            quantitative-explanatory mapping is too facile; the way in which a
                            measure is applied essentially depends on the research
                        question.
[^14]:  None of the texts used in the analysis are of
                                disputed authorship, and the genre signal was kept relatively
                                constant, with all texts labeled as ‘prose’. The genre signal is a
                                major confounding factor in authorship attribution .
[^15]:  See https://sites.google.com/site/computationalstylistics/corpora
[^16]:  Texts by
                            Walser were extracted from Gutenberg.org. Those texts, as well as ones
                            from many more authors (currently more than 2,000) extracted from
                            Gutenberg-DE, TextGrid Repository, and the German Text Archive (DTA)
                            have been compiled to form a unified corpus of narrative modernism
                            (KOLIMO), together with added metadata and a few style features. Visit
                            the ongoing project under https://kolimo.uni-goettingen.de/about.html
[^17]:  The lower margin was set to 800 mfw in
                            accordance with Jannidis & Lauer, who however set the upper limit to
                            3,000 mfw . I set the upper limit to 1,500
                            mfw, thus capturing the range of values where Eder’s Delta’s appears to
                            perform best (between 1,000 and 1,500 mfw; cf. ). However, Evert et al. (2015), who
                            replicated Jannidis et al. (2015) with more feature samples, state that
                            the number of features (mfw) remains a critical factor for which no good strategy is
                                    available. The results thus need to be further tested.
[^18]: 
                            Stylometric methods such as cluster analysis applied to literary data
                            typically involve a series of tests with different parameter settings,
                            including varying the distance measure, the number of mfw, the linkage
                            algorithm, and others (cf. , for German literature). It has been
                            pointed out that this kind of scenario is prone to cherry
                                picking, i.e. omitting results that do not fit the
                            expected/desired outcome . The overall
                            results, specifically the bootstrap consensus tree, however, give some
                            reason to assume that Kafka is indeed an author with a distinct – if not
                            solitary – style. Yet, the single dendrograms vary with regard to Kaka’s
                            nearest neighbors. Therefore, all obtained results need to be further
                            evaluated, and possibly sided by experiments with other parameter
                            settings.
[^19]:  Comparable
                            to the oppose-function of the stylo-package , which has been further developed since the
                            time of writing.
[^20]:  Altenberg was newly
                            introduced for the present analysis. Because of his colloquial style, I
                            extrapolated that he might use adverbs, negations, and modal particles
                            in a similar way as Kafka. However, the result is very similar to that
                            of Schnitzler, and the number of types among the top 100 keywords is
                            only half of Kafka’s.
[^21]:  The present
                            analysis has good external validity, as shown by prior analysis  based on a much larger and more varied
                            reference corpus (~ 93,000 texts, ~ 600 authors, ~ 134 million words,
                            diverse genres). Comparison shows very similar results for Kafka (N=24
                            (big reference corpus) vs. N=27 (present corpus)) and Schnitzler (N=10
                            (big reference corpus) vs. N=12 (present corpus)), and numerically
                            identical ones for Meyrink (N=7) and Trakl (N=1). Since the larger
                            corpus is closer to an assumed true population of
                            newer German literature, there is good reason to assume that the
                            findings obtained can be generalized by taking as a stylistic
                                norm a larger population (of texts, genres, and
                            authors across time). 
[^22]:  There
                            are many KWIC tools available online, e.g. in Voyant, AntConc, as well
                            as functions in R and Python.